---
index: 2
answer: "Mean: $\frac{93}{16}$"
statement: |
    Find the mean and variance of the number of games in the World Series.
    Recall that it is won by the first team to win four games and assume that the outcomes are determined by flipping a coin.
---    
We begin by noting that the support for this random variable is pretty constrained: This random variable takes on the integer values between 4 and 7, that is if the random variable is $W$, $W \in \mathbb{Z}: 4 \leq w \leq 7.$ 

The easiest of the values to generate is the case that one of the teams wins the first four games. From the problem set up, we know that the game are independent, and we will assume that "determined by flipping a coin" means a "fair" coin so that the probability of a win is $0.5$. 

Then, the probability of this event occuring is: $\Pi_{1}^{4} \frac{1}{2} = (\frac{1}{2})^4 = \frac{1}{2^4} = \frac{1}{16}$. 

What about that the series ends in 5 games? For this to occur, the team would need to win three of the first four games, and win the fifth game. Now, we need some choose functions, and probably to formalize our logic some. Let's let $P(W_{(5)})$ be the probability that the series ends with a win in the 5th game. To get to this, the team needs to win the 5th game, which has a probability of $0.5$. But, they also have to win three of the first four. 

To do so, we can note that there are four ways to get here: 

1. They lose the first game, and win the next two. 
2. They win the first, lose the second, and win the next two. 
3. They win the first two, lose the third, and win the fourth. 
4. They win the first three and lose the fourth. 

We can generalize this with a choose function: 

$$
{4 \choose 1} \cdot P(W_{(4)} \cap L_{(1)}) = {4 \choose 1} (0.5)^5 = \frac{4}{32} = \frac{1}{8}
$$

Now that we've noted the pattern, we can see that to win in the 6th game would require they win 4, and lose 2 out of the first five games. 

$$
{5 \choose 2} \cdot P(W_{(4)} \cap L_{(2)} = {5 \choose 2} (0.5)^6 = \frac{10}{64} = \frac{5}{32}
$$

And, that to win in the 7th game would require they win 4 and lose 3 of the first six games. 

$$
{6 \choose 3} \cdot P(W_{(4)} \cap L_{(3)} = {6 \choose 3} (0.5)^7 = \frac{20}{128} = \frac{10}{64} = \frac{5}{32}
$$

If all of these PDF generations are correct, then we should observe that the total across the support is equal to 1. 

$$
\frac{1}{16} + \frac{1}{8} + \frac{5}{32} + \frac{5}{32} = 0.5. 
$$

What gives? Well, the **other** team has this same probability! So, for each of these, the serires could end if either **Team A** or **Team B** had that record. Which means that each of these probabilities should be scaled by a factor of 2, which will give us the PDF that we want: 

$$
\begin{aligned} 
P(W=4) &= \frac{2}{16} \\ 
P(W=5) &= \frac{4}{16} \\ 
P(W=6) &= \frac{5}{16} \\ 
P(W=7) &= \frac{5}{16}
\end{aligned}
$$

And, now, to produce the Expectation: 

$$
\begin{aligned} 
E[X] &= \sum f(x) x \\ 
  &= \frac{2}{16} (4) + \frac{4}{16} (5) + \frac{5}{16} (6) + \frac{5}{16} (7) \\
	&= \frac{8}{16} + \frac{20}{16} + \frac{30}{16} + \frac{35}{16} \\ 
	&= \frac{93}{16} \\ 
	&= 5.8125
\end{aligned} 
$$