---
index: 6
statement: |
    Can we have a random variable with $E[X]=3$ and $E[X^2]=8$? Give an example or prove that it is impossible.
---
At first glance, it might seem reasonable to imagine that this is possible. This means that there are a few ways to go about answering the question: 

1. We could try to prove this for the general case. 
2. We could try to disprove this for the general case. 
3. We could try to produce a single counter-example, which would then mean that it does not hold generally. 

But, how should we do this? Because we are given a few facts about the random variable, it might feel tempting to start making up random variables and outcomes. So, you're making values for $x$ and values for $f_{x}(x)$. But, this is going to get tedious, because you'll be picking and choosing values that are never quite going to work. 

So, I might try by starting with counter examples, or a general counter example case. 

We have an alternative statement about the Variance of a random variable: 

$$
  V[X] = E[X^2] - E[X]^2
$$

Notice that we have very nearly all the pieces to write into this formula, since we possess information about $E[X]$ and $E[X^2]$. 

And so, substituting in for these values, we have 

$$
  V[X] = 8 - (3)^2 = -1
$$

When we combine this together with the Kolmogorov Axioms, we know that we cannot have a negative variance. And, so, we've quickly arrived at a contradiction that this random variable would have to have negative variance, which is not possible. 
