---
topic: 1
statement: |
    Suppose we draw $2$ cards out of a deck of $52$. Let $A$=&ldquo;the first 
    card is an ace&rdquo; and $B$=&ldquo;the second card is a spade&rdquo;. 
    Are $A$ and $B$ independent?
tag: '#19, 27'
ref: epfa
answer: 'NO'
---
In order to check whether $A$ and $B$ are independent, we assume the definition
of independence: $A,B$ are independent if $P(A\cap B)=P(A)P(B)$. Let's compute
the individual probabilities first. 

[Problem 7](#prob-7) substantiates the importance of our assumption on the
*ordering*. We assume for this problem that ***order matters***. It's an
obligatory choice for this problem, since the events $A,B$ are defined by
certain positions of the cards. If we do not respect the order, the events would
not hold much meaning. From the nature of the experiment, it's also safe to
assume that the outcomes are **equally-likely**.

The sample space \\[\Omega=\\{(c_1,c_2)\| c_1 \text{ is any card}, c_2\text{ is 
any card except for }c_1\\}.\\] So, $\|\Omega\|=52\times51$.

Since there are only $4$ aces in a standard deck, there are only
$4$ ways to get an ace for the first card. Now, the second card can be
anything---except for the ace we have already picked for the first position. So, 
the total possible ways the event $A$ can occur is $\|A\|=4\times51$. Therefore,
\\[
P(A)=\frac{4\times51}{52\times51}=\frac{4}{52}=\frac{1}{13}.
\\]

The computation of $P(B)$ is not very straight forward. We denote by
$C$ the events that the first card is a space. $P(C)=\frac{1}{13}$. Then
\\[
    \begin{align}
    P(B)&=P(B\cap C)+P(B\cap C')\\\\\
    &=P(\text{both cards are spade})+P(\text{only the second card is a space})\\\\\
    &=\frac{4\times3}{52\times51}+\frac{52\times4}{52\times51}\\\\\
    \end{align}
\\]

\\[
    \begin{align}
    P(A\cap B)&=P(\text{first card is an ace})+P(\text{second card is a space})\\\\\
    &=\frac{4\times4}{52\times51}\\\\\
    &=
    \end{align}
\\]

Since, $P(A\cap B)\neq P(A)P(B)$, the events are not independent.