---
topic: 1
statement: |
    Nine children are seated at random in three rows of three desks. Let
    $A$=&ldquo;Al and Bobby sit in the same row&rdquo; and $B$=&ldquo;Al and
    Bobby both sit at one of the four corner desks.&rdquo; Are $A$ and $B$ 
    independent? 
tag: '#24, p29'
ref: epfa
answer: 'NO'
---
Since the events $A,B$ involve the children sitting at specific positions, we
assume that ***order matters***. We also assume that the outcomes in $\Omega$
are *equally-likely*. Usually, words like *at random, fair*, etc, allude to such
a probability assignment.

To compute the probabilities, we need to first compute the number of elements in
the events $A,B,A\cap B$. The [Rule of
Product](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rule_of_product) can sometimes facilitate
combinatorial counting to a great extent. If a task is accomplish by
accomplishing a number of subtasks, then the number of ways the whole task is
done = the product of the number of ways each subtask is done.

$\Omega$: The task of putting the nine children in the desks can be divided
in to the following (ordered) subtasks:<br/>
1st student: $9$ ways (all desks empty)<br />
2st student: $8$ ways ($8$ desks left)<br />
...<br/>
9th student: $1$ way  (only $1$ desk left)<br />
So, the Rule of Product, $\|\Omega\|$=the number of ways the children are seated
=$9\times8\times\ldots\times1=9!$.

$A$: The task of putting Al and Bobby in the same row is divided into the
following subtasks:<br/>
choose the row they sit in: $3$ ways (there are $3$ rows of desks)<br/> 
In that row, place Al: $3$ ways (all $3$ desks are empty)<br/>
place Bobby: $3-1=2$ ways (one desk already taken by Al)<br /> now place the
other children: $7!$ (following the counting logic used for $\Omega$)<br/>
Using the Rule of Product, we get $\|A\|=3\times3\times2\times7!$. <br/>
Since we have assumed that each outcome is equally-likely,
$P(A)=\frac{\|A\|}{\|\Omega\|}=\frac{3\times3\times2\times7!}{9!}=\frac{3\times3\times2\times7!}{9\times8\times7!}=\frac{1}{4}$.

$B$: There are $4$ corner desks. Al can placed in one of them in $4$ ways and
Bobby in $4-1=3$ ways. For the rest, $7!$ ways. Again the Rule  of Product
gives, $\|B\|=4\times3\times7!$. So,
$P(B)=\frac{\|B\|}{\|\Omega\|}=\frac{4\times3\times7!}{9!}=\frac{4\times3}{9\times8}=\frac{1}{6}$.
 
$A\cap B$: This the is the event that Al and Bobby sit at the corners of the
same row. Subtasks:<br/>
find the row: $3$ ways<br/>
place Al in that row: $2$ ways (only $2$ corner desks)<br/>
place Bobby in that row: $1$ way (only $1$ corner desk left)<br/>
all other students: $7!$ ways<br/>
So, $\|A\cap B\|=3\times2\times1\times7!\$. $P(A\cap B)=\frac{\|A\cap
B\|}{\|\Omega\|}=\frac{3\times2\times1\times7!}{9!}=\frac{3\times2}{9\times8}=\frac{1}{12}$.

Since $P(A\cap B)\neq P(A)P(B)$, not independent.



