---
index: 1
level: 0
statement: |
    Suppose we draw $2$ cards out of a deck of $52$. Let $A$=&ldquo;the first  card is an ace&rdquo; and $B$=&ldquo;the second card is a spade&rdquo;. Are $A$ and $B$ independent?
answer: YES
---

# Solution Concept and Assumptions
In order to check whether $A$ and $B$ are independent, we use the definition
of independence: $A,B$ are independent if $P(A\cap B)=P(A)P(B)$. Let's compute
the individual probabilities first. 

**Note:** We assume for this problem that ***order matters***. We have to 
make this assumption for this problem, since the events $A,B$ are defined by
certain positions of the cards. If we do not respect the ordering, the events
would become meaningless. From the nature of the experiment, it's also safe
to assume that the outcomes are ***equally-likely***.

# Solve for $P(A)P(B)$
Since there are only $4$ aces in a standard deck, there are only
$4$ ways to get an ace for the first card. And, thus, $$P(A) = \frac{4}{52} = \frac{1}{13}.$$

Now, let's consider how you might draw a spade in the second card, $P(B)$. There are two ways, 

1. You could draw a spade in the first card, AND draw a spade on the second card.
2. You could *not* draw a spade in the first card, AND draw a spade on the second card.

There is a $\frac{1}{4}$ chance that you draw a spade on the first draw; and a complimentary $\frac{3}{4}$ chance that you do *not* draw a spade on the first draw. And so, 

$$
    \begin{aligned}
      P(B) &= \frac{1}{4}\cdot \frac{12}{51} + \frac{3}{4}\cdot \frac{13}{51} \\ 
           &= \frac{12}{4\cdot 51} + \frac{39}{4\cdot 51} \\ 
           &= \frac{51}{4\cdot 51} \\ 
           &= \frac{1}{4}
    \end{aligned}
$$

With this computed, we can compute the statement for $P(A)P(B) = \frac{1}{13}\cdot\frac{1}{4} = \frac{1}{52}$

# Solve for $P(A\cap B)$

The event $A\cap B$ says the first card is an ace and second card is a spade.
The computation of $P(A\cap B)$ is not very straight-forward. Let us denote by
$C$ the event that the first card is a spade. Using the *law of total
probability*, we can write

$$
    \begin{align}
    P(A\cap B)&=P(A\cap B\cap C)+P(A\cap B\cap C')                        \\
    &=P(\text{first card is the ace of spade and second card is a spade}) \\
    &+P(\text{first card is not a spade but an ace}                       \\
    &\text{ and second card is a spade})                                  \\
    &=\frac{1\times12}{52\times51}+\frac{3\times13}{52\times51}           \\ 
    &=                                                                    \\
    &=\frac{51}{52\times51}                                               \\ 
    &= \frac{1}{52}.                                                      \\
    \end{align}
$$

# Evaluate the Solution Criteria 

We wrote at the outset, that if $P(A)P(B) = P(A\cap B)$ we would say these are independent. 

- We have found the $P(A)P(B) = \frac{1}{52}$.
- We have also found that $P(A\cap B) = \frac{1}{52}$.
- And so, according to our criteria, these are independent. 
