---
level: 1
statement: |
    When Al and Bob play tennis, Al wins a set with probability $0.7$ while Bob wins with probability $0.3$. What is the probability that Al will be the first to win (a) two sets and (b) three sets?
---
Let $A_i$ denote the event that Al wins the $i$-th set, where $i=1,2,3,...$. We have $P(A_i)=0.7$ for any $i$. The problem does not say anything about independence, but it tacitly refers to it nevertheless. It assumes that that the sets are played *independently*. Mathematically speaking, $A_i,A_j$ are statistically independent for $i\neq j$. As a consequence, $A_i,A_j'$ are also statistically independent for $i\neq j$ (see [Problem 21](/problems/22)).

Each outcome in $\Omega$ can be expressed as a sequence of the winners. For example, $AABA\in\Omega$ denotes the outcome where Al wins the first two sets and the fourth set, and Bob wins the third. We can also write this outcome in terms of the events defined earlier.
\\[
\\{AABAB\\}=A_1\cap A_2\cap A_3'\cap A_4\cap A_5'
\\]

Now, we can compute the probability of our example outcome in the following way:
\\[
\begin{align}
P(\\{AABA\\})&=P(A_1\cap A_2\cap A_3'\cap A_4\cap A_5')\\\\\
&=P(A_1)P(A_2)P(A_3')P(A_4)P(A_5'),\text{ using independence}\\\\\
&=(0.7)^3\times(1-0.7)^2
\end{align}
\\]

In light of the above computations, we can now put forward the following formula for computing the probability of any outcome.
\\[
P(\text{an outcome sequence})=(0.7)^a\times(0.3)^b,    
\\]
where $a$ are $b$ are the number of sets won by Al and Bob, respectively, in the sequence.

(a) Let $S$ denote the event that Al is the first to win two sets. So,
$S=\\{AA,BAA,ABA\\}$. We get
\\[
\begin{align}
P(S)&=P(AA)+P(BAA)+P(ABA),\text{ addition rule}\\\\\
&=(0.7)^2+(0.7)^2(0.3)^1+(0.7)^2(0.3)^1\\\\\
&=0.49+0.147+0.147\\\\\
&=0.784.
\end{align}
\\]

(b) Let $T$ denote the event that Al is the first to win three sets. So,
$T=\\{AAA,AABA,AABBA,ABAA,BAAA,ABABA,ABBAA,BBAAA,BABAA,BAABA\\}$. Therefore,
\\[
P(T)=(0.7)^3+3\times(0.7)^3(0.3)^1+6\times(0.7)^3(0.3)^2=0.8371.
\\]
