---
index: 19
caption: Nothing is Independent!
statement: |
    Show that $\emptyset$ is independent of $A$ for any $A$.
---
This proof will mostly rely on using definitions.  

We begin by recalling the definition of independence. Events $A$ and $B$ are independent if and only if $P(A\cap B) = P(A)P(B)$. Translating definition to the current case, we are interested in evaluating whether $P(A \cap \emptyset) = P(A)P(\emptyset)$. 

To take the long way, first consider $P(A \cap \emptyset)$. The intersection between $A$ and the empty set is just the emptyset -- they have nothing in common. Another way of saying this is that any set and the empty set are *disjoint*.  As a result, $P(A \cap \emptyset) = P(\emptyset)$. 

But, what is the $P(\emptyset)$? Without simply invoking a definition, it feels as though it could either be the case the $P(\emptyset) = 0$, or that $P(\emptyset) = 1$. (As an aside, I can see at this point that if the $P(\emptyset) = 1$ we would not be able to complete this proof, so I can reason about a direction that I hope is fruitful.) 

Let's see if we can derive from the axioms of probability which of these is true. 

* What happens with the union of two sets? $P(A \cup B) = P(A) + P(B) - P(A\cap B)$. The union of two sets is just the combination of their elements, minus those elements that have been double counted. 
* What happens with the union of two sets, if they are disjoint? $P(A \cup B) = P(A) + P(B)$. Because there are no intersections between disjoint sets, the probability of their intersection is always zero. 

Suppose that rather than dealing with $A$, we were dealing with $\Omega$, the entire sample space. We know, from an axiom of probability that $P(\Omega) = 1$. From the statement that we made above, we know that $P(\Omega \cup \emptyset) = P(Omega) + P(\emptyset)$, since the emptyset is disjoint from all sets.  

So then, $P(\Omega \cup \emptyset) = P(\Omega) + P(\emptyset)$. Which means that $1 = 1  + P(\emptyset)$, or that $P(\emptyset) = 0$. Now we're really making progress. 

Because the probability of the emptyset is zero, we can rewrite the statements that started the question in the following way: $P(A \cap \emptyset) = P(\emptyset) = 0$. And so finally, we can write that $0 = P(A) * 0$, which is true. 
