---
index: 5
level: 1
statement: |
    Nine children are seated at random in three rows of three desks with all arrangements equally probable. Let $A$=&ldquo;Aastha and Bobby sit in the same row&rdquo; and $B$=&ldquo;Aastha and Bobby both sit at one of the four corner desks.&rdquo; Are $A$ and $B$  independent? 
answer: NO
---
Since the events $A,B$ involve the children sitting at specific positions, we assume that ***order matters***. We also assume that the outcomes in $\Omega$ are *equally-likely*. Usually, words like *at random, fair*, etc, allude to such a probability assignment.

To compute the probabilities, we need to first compute the number of elements in the events $A,B,A\cap B$. The [Rule of
Product](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rule_of_product) can sometimes facilitate combinatorial counting to a great extent. If a task can be accomplished by accomplishing a number of subtasks, then the number of ways the whole task is done = the product of the number of ways each subtask is done.

$\Omega$: The task of putting the nine children in the desks can be split into the following (ordered) subtasks:
1st student: $9$ ways (all desks empty)
2nd student: $8$ ways ($8$ desks left)
...
9th student: $1$ way  (only $1$ desk left)<br /> So, the Rule of Product gives
$\|\Omega\|$=the number of ways the children are seated
=$9\times8\times\ldots\times1=9!$.

$A$: The task of putting Aastha and Bobby in the same row is divided into the
following subtasks:  
choose the row they sit in: $3$ ways (there are $3$ rows of desks)  
In that row, place Aastha: $3$ ways (all $3$ desks are empty)  
place Bobby: $3-1=2$ ways (one desk already taken by Aastha)  
now place the other children: $7!$ (following the counting logic used for $\Omega$)
Using the Rule of Product, we get $\|A\|=3\times3\times2\times7!$.   
Since we have assumed that each outcome is equally-likely, $P(A)=\frac{\|A\|}{\|\Omega\|}=\frac{3\times3\times2\times7!}{9!}=\frac{3\times3\times2\times7!}{9\times8\times7!}=\frac{1}{4}$.

$B$: There are $4$ corner desks. Aastha can be placed in one of them in $4$ ways and Bobby in $4-1=3$ ways. For the rest, $7!$ ways. Again the Rule  of Product
gives, $\|B\|=4\times3\times7!$. So, $P(B)=\frac{\|B\|}{\|\Omega\|}=\frac{4\times3\times7!}{9!}=\frac{4\times3}{9\times8}=\frac{1}{6}$.
 
$A\cap B$: This the is the event that Aastha and Bobby sit at the corner desks of the same row. Subtasks:
find the row: $2$ ways  
place Aastha in that row: $2$ ways (only $2$ corner desks)  
place Bobby in that row: $1$ way (only $1$ corner desk left)  
all other students: $7!$ ways  
So, $\|A\cap B\|=2\times2\times1\times7!\$. $P(A\cap B)=\frac{\|A\cap B\|}{\|\Omega\|}=\frac{2\times2\times1\times7!}{9!}=\frac{2\times2}{9\times8}=\frac{1}{18}$.

Since $P(A\cap B)\neq P(A)P(B)$, not independent.
